---
authorName: Sabrina Lange
authorGithubUsername: sweinzie 
issue: 97
title: Why every Project Should Have Gardeners
---
# {{page.title}}

As a gardner ist taking care of his plants to bring some fruit, we should also have people around in the projects helping us to bring learn and develop ourself to the next level. Unfortunatelly this is no common practice yet, therefore i would like to show you how this may work within our projects by keeping the picture of a gardener.

Everyone started small. Even the tallest and strongest tree started as a seed and over time, thanks to a lot of sunlight, rainfall and good soil it became a deep-rooted, reliable and sturdy tree. 
Very much the same also applies to us, people who are involved in project work, where we try to give our best effort to make the project a success. 

We work in projects as a subject matter expert, as an experienced project manager or as a newcomer that will need support from the team to grow to the next level. Roles and tasks are assigned based on our experience. Experiences from former projects are our soil. We are able to grow on new and demanding tasks but will fail on overwhelming tasks. 
If our responsibility lies within our comfort zone and is business as usual, we will not reach our limits. We need challenges such as finding new solutions and new approaches to grow. Just as a plant that needs more and more space to become bigger and greater we need space and the opportunity to make our own decisions and take responsibility.
We need staffing managers who see the potential of the project but also required skills for staffing such a project with team members. Managers that are aware of the strengths and weaknesses of each person and if there is a realistic feasibility that person can perform well and do a great job within the project.

Besides the soil a plant needs right at the beginning also some kind of pillar. As long as the roots are not deeply anchored, and the stem is still fragile it is important that the plant is supported. It is exactly like that with us trying to grow in our projects. By having all these challenges and opportunities to grow, sometimes we will make a mistake. Sometimes we are not fulfilling expectation of our stakeholders, not communicating well, not taking right decisions, not acting as expected. These are the moments we need support and orientation when this situation takes us to our limits. We need someone taking care of us, helping that we will not break in the storm but become stronger and are prepared for the next time we face a similar situation.

Most often we expect the project manager to support and stand up for us, but this is not always the case. This may be because of personal reasons or up to political topics like internal - external employee. From my perspective it doesn't matter which role supports me, as long as I know right from the beginning that I can count on a person who is going to support me. This supporting person should be within the project stakeholders or at least within the area affected by my activities. It could be the PL, the sponsor, a team lead, someone from operation, business representatives and so on. Crucial is, that this person is aware of the project and what's going on, that I am linked and in close contact with the person, that I have an open and transparent communication to the person and that the person is a supporter of mine. For this reason, you should setup bilateral meetings or ask for feedback.

Even if our terrain is nutritious and we have support, we still need water, heat and sunlight to grow. Only with this we can become what we shall or would like to be. Within our project that means that we have someone close to us ("the gardener") who ensures that we deliver on time, within the expected quality and that we will not only choose the easy way but also try new solutions if time and place are right. 

Assuming that, this is the easiest way and what we will find most often within projects. People are asking for help or review, pair programming e.g. peer groups outside project to share experience and ask for advice. As this is most often related to objective questions or tasks, my experience is that most often people are happy to be linked with others to improve their working results. Most often in self-organizing teams team members switch tasks from one to each other to have best match of skills and performance for the respective task. Maybe you have also the possibility to be supported by a consulting coach or mentor. E.g. we had a setup where the junior project lead got dedicted tasks and areas he was responsible for. Once a week we checked status, deliverables and doscissed possible scenarios.

The last aspect I would like to share may be the most critical one. All of you who have a garden with trees or roses will be aware of the fact that sometimes you have to cut down old boughs and branches to enable the plant to grow any further. Even if it seems as if the plant is destroyed and will never come to life again, latest at spring it will be back again, greater and brighter than ever before. Same is valid for us human beings. Sometimes we need someone telling us where we have bad behaviors, where we follow old patterns and where we should be open for new ones.

We may not be pleased to hear where we are not performing well but sometimes we have to decide if we are going to take feedback as an advice to follow or not. Any feedback should at least lead us to think about ourselves, even if we decide that what we did was ok, and we will not change anything. Possible ways to grow are for example to ask for a 360-degree feedback from team members, peers and superior. Additionally, it is key always to reflect on ourselves and on the feedback we received. Therefore, it is important that we know our own strengths and weakness and find ways to strengthen the strengths and to overcome our weaknesses. A personal mentor or coach can also be very helpful; also, soft skills training or professional literature can help to expand your personal horizon.

The conclusion of my recommendation is to check staffing of the project team right at the beginning in order to find someone to take over this mentoring role. Not only the availability of the resources but also if they fit for the project. Sometimes it seems to be a good idea to have a "training on the job" setup. In this case it is important to ensure that there is someone within the project taking over the trainer role and to consider this approach inside the project planning (time and budget). On the other hand, it is the responsibility of each and every one of us to take the opportunity to grow by looking for our personal gardener or a growth concept as well as being prepared to be the gardener for someone else to accompany in the growth process.
